Nice bright day in College Station. Had the
pleasure of chatting with Harrison Hurth, fellow
Presbyterian, and a dear friend about his
experiences here at College Station.
This is February 15, 1999, a bright sunny day. Have
the pleasure and honor of chatting with Harrison
Hurth. Before we start talking about A&M, so that
anyone in the future might know a little bit about
your background before A&M, give us a brief
biographical summary of your experience before
coming to College Station. Okay. Well, I was born
in Pontiac, Illinois, and I lived there through
high school. I went to undergraduate school at
Illinois Western University in Bloomington,
Illinois, where I met my
wife, Margaret Rowland, and married her in 1938. I
went then to the University of Illinois for a
master's degree, and I taught for a number of years
in Illinois high school. It's in Clinton,
Illinois. I came to A&M when the University of
Illinois placement office sent me a notice that
A&M wanted some teachers for summer school. That
didn't sound like a summer resort, and I thought,
well, that's a chance to give the collegiate level
a shot. So I applied. What year was that? That was
1946. And Dr. Thomas Mayo replied and said he
didn't meet anyone after all, He probably would be
contacting me in the fall, but maybe not quite that
strong, but something between a possibility and a
polite brush off. And I think on the Fourth of July
weekend, I was visiting some friends in Western
Illinois, and he had called me prior to that, and I
talked it over with him, and he crashed around. He
had made me an offer. So I called on that weekend,
and I arrived a week late in September 1946.
My younger daughter had just been born and was not
really doing too well. Margaret was still in the
hospital. I came down alone, and someone had been
covering for me for a week or so. I'd be interested,
you came by car? Came by car. And what, how much gear
did you bring in that car? Well, what I had was a 1938
Chevrolet Coupe. They didn't have a very big
truck, but I obviously bought enough stuff to
survive because I had enough clothing to last
until Thanksgiving, when I got my wife at
Thanksgiving time. And then y'all drove by. Was
that your only car? Yeah, what happened this time,
the relative drove Margaret and her mother to
Memphis. I went to Memphis on the train, and we
drove back then in her mother's car. And where were
you all living then? Well, we lived out to A&M
Annex. The University College had taken over
Lowe-Bine Air Base and turned it into the A&M
Annex. We had an apartment in what had been an
officer's ward in the hospital. That scared me. I
was going to bring a new baby down. I spent every
evening with an old Dutch cleanser scrubbing down
the walls. We had a large room big enough for a
square dance in front, which we did not use in the
apartment behind it. We had, I don't know, four or
five radiators, two or three commodes. And was
this furnished? Yes. What kind of furniture was in
it? Well, no I'm sorry, it was not furnished.
That's another story. We did burn our furniture.
And when the furniture truck drove up, the driver
demanded $700, which I hadn't counted. A lot of
money then. I didn't have $700. So I hot-footed it
into the First National Bank and talked to Travis
Bryant. Got $700 and have banked with him ever
since. I can imagine how that would be important.
That air base experience, I think, is very, very
important. That story about what was the
enrollment and the out there and the faculty. How
many folks were there? Well, 1946 was the year the
veterans came. And the enrollment of the college
virtually doubled. Yes, probably the total
moment must have been in the area of 7,000. And they
put a freshman class. All freshmen? All freshmen.
What would that
be? And some of those were veterans and some were
not. Is that right? I'm not sure whether veterans
went to the annex or not. I'm really not sure. All
right, so you're implying that most of them- Most
of them are- Right out of high school. Right out of
high school, yeah. They had the whole setup. They
had military personnel out there to have a core.
They set up a campus post office. They had a
student center. Dr. Harrington and John Paul
Abbott at different times, whatever the title
was, I believe they called them deans. and
directed the operation. And you offered the full
range of courses for freshmen.
Did any of them come into the main campus to take any
courses? I don't believe so. Our faculty people
taught both classes. I taught mostly on the main
campus, actually. And those of us who did carpool,
And I had a semester or two when I taught a couple of
days at the annex and three other times. Describe
the students and their capability. Well, I dealt
largely with the veterans. I did teach freshman at
the annex, as I said, a couple days a week, a
semester or two. But I dealt very largely with the
veterans. And of course, they were excellent
students. Do you remember
any anecdotes or examples of that purpose and
determination on their part?
Any of them ever say anything or do anything that
illustrated that?
One thing that surprised me, quite a few of those
fellows went into the Cold War. I would have
thought, you know, that they had all the military
they wanted, but a very precise number of them went
into the Cold War. And their academic performance
was very good. Were there instances when you could
sense that the experience of where they'd been and
what they'd seen helped them to understand
something that you were trying to teach them?
Well, I'm sure that happened, but I really don't
remember any specifics. Obviously, we knew they
were around. What was your teaching load? What
courses and how many? We taught 18 hours, for
goodness sake. Freshman composition, of course,
and the sophomore literature
course. I took that, I taught that, I taught a shift
for the course. About what was the enrollment per
section?
I guess it was pretty close to 30. But no big
sections? No big sections. No, I don't think there
were. And you gave them the same kind of
assignments and homework that you would have any
other classes? Pretty much. What about their
attendance? Is it regular?
Regular. Let's go back to the air base. There are
many hundreds of students out there. and almost
all of their activities were out there i know
that's when the fish drill team was created and i
understand there was a freshman band what
interaction was there between the main campus of
the students and the air base well actually uh
Well, they went to town on weekends and all that
kind of thing. Actually, it wasn't all that much. I
think the sophomores were very unhappy that they
weren't getting out the freshmen as they might
have liked. Well, was there any hazing out there?
No. Because there were only freshmen? Only
freshmen. Now, about how many of you faculty lived
out there?
Well, let's
see. There must have been 30 or 40 families. There
was a housing area near the entrance called The
Village, and a group lived up there. And the rest of
us were in barracks apartments. And I don't know if
you know these people or not. the Lee Martins and
the Staley Cresswells and the Ed Holdridges and
the C.K. Estins and the Vance Sumner in economics.
Vance and I put out a garden together one spring and
I started digging first and I did cut one end of it.
Vance showed up one day and said, now's the time to
start our garden. I'll take this. So I had
to dig up the other end. And you did garden. Did many
others garden out there? Yeah, there were several
gardens. We had a pretty nice life out there,
really. We had a swimming pool. We had a baseball
diamond. We were working. I just wanted to be sure
it was turning. Yeah. We... had all those miles of
barracks for the kids to go skate in. Great place
for kids. Was there any hazing of the freshmen? I
don't think so. Because there were no sophomores.
No sophomores there, no. But they were organized
in military fashion. They ate together. Not many
of them had cars. That's true. Yeah, I remember
that mess all night. They kidded me. I came down
here from Illinois, and one of the first meals we
had, I said, you know, I don't like beans, but these
are the best beans I ever ate. Black-eyed peas.
Never heard of
them. So you all dined in the old base mess hall. Did
you faculty members eat in the dining hall, or did
you eat on your own at home? Well, I ate in the dining
hall until I got my family. And most people did.
Describe the faculty social life between you
faculty families that were out there. Well, there
was an article in the paper not too long ago that you
might have seen about my wife and her bridge club.
They organized a bridge club out there that's
still going. and got together and played cards and
we played some softball with the garden and swam.
We didn't really have, well we might have used the
student center, actually didn't have much of a
place to get together as a group. We got very close
as neighbors. The, and you said that Dr.
Harrington and or John Paul were
administratively responsible for? Yes, at
different times. Dr. Harrington started and at
some point he moved on to John Paul Abbott. Now did
that have, what was the official title of that
unit? Was it Texas A&M? Oh, the whole unit. Texas
A&M Annex. Annex, okay. And you were out there how
long? Four years. Four? Oh, I didn't know it was
that long. We moved, well, three actually. We
moved here and actually four now. And most others
stayed one more year. So then that lasted from...
46 to 50. 46 to 50, the interim period between World
War II and Vietnam. I mean, and Korean War. Right.
And the Korean War. Back to, what was your
beginning faculty salary? I believe it was
$2,250. For nine months.
Well, actually, most of us got one and a half. Well,
but I'm assuming that was the base. Yeah, that was
nine months. And
you and your wife had two daughters at that point.
Was there an elementary school out there for those
that were school age? Well, our older daughter was
school age, and she went to some advanced school.
Oh! Little country school. Little country
school. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And it started there in
the first grade. And she came home one day
and said, I know the first grade boys, the second
grade boys, those third grade boys are hard. Came
back crying one day, said she had to show us her
report card. My A has it marked black, nobody else
had it. Oh, it was a plus. Uh-oh, I was going to say.
She was there, I think, two years and then went to
Bowie School. All right, as you look back on it, how
did those two years, were those good years for her?
Yes.
She had a splendid teacher, one she loved, and they
were good years. All right, so you taught out
there. Three years. Then you moved to this house?
Yes. And that's 1949. And what's the address of
this house? 208 Fairview Avenue. Okay. Describe
the neighborhood when you all moved in. What was
Southside like? Well, really, it was pretty bare.
This house was built by a lady in extension named
Jenny Camp. She built this house with two plugs
next door and one across the corner. And this was a
prayer ring. Some of the men in the extension
thought she was going to lose her shirt, so they
formed a committee to try to get this away. But Miss
Jenny went ahead and did all right. Then, I don't
know much about this, but shortly thereafter,
there was a group of faculty people I'm not even
sure who they were, but they formed what they
called the corporation and they built the good
money houses on the streets and they began to fill
in for the trees. Were there any native trees on
these blocks?
We have a native juju tree. And this area is, am I
correct, that it was called Southside or
Southgate?
College Park. College Park. Oh, okay. Were there
some older houses east of us, just south of what
used to be called Jersey?
Yes. All right. You all move here. The girls grow up
here, your two daughters. And you then, did you
teach a fourth year out at the Air Base, or did you
start teaching full-time here on the campus that
fourth year? I began teaching full-time. About
how big was the English department in numbers of
faculty? Oh, they had hired a good many. Motley
Crue also, because of the influx of veterans. I
suppose we had 50 maybe. Who were, let's try to
recall as many of those as you can, who were some of
the senior English faculty when you arrived?
Well, Dr. Mayo headed the department, Dr. Morgan
was here, Dr. Abbott, John Paul Abbott. Ernest
Hitchcock.
Nolan Shepard.
Bird Price.
All right, let's go back. Louis Hauer. Louis
Hauer. Let's go back. Describe Dr. Mayo for
someone that may never have met him. Well he's a
very charming man. Very lively and articulate and
learned and cordial. He just exuded charm. He was a
great conversationalist. He couldn't bear a
moment of silence. Now he was the department head?
Yes, he had been moved over from the library. He had
been a librarian and I think really that was his
first love.
And y'all, the department office in the academic
building? In the academic building. Which
floors? Third. Third. How many floors are there?
We were just below the architects. All right, they
were on the, I think they're the fourth or the
fifth, whatever it is. Yeah, so we were on the floor
below them, whatever that was. I remember later
when I was going over every night trying to write a
dissertation, my wife would worry about me, and I
said, go over there and load the office up. Never
alone. Let's see.
Dr. Abbott. Describe him. Very dapper. Very
dapper little fellow. I think the students called
him Jelly Abbott.
Now he became a dean, didn't he? Yes. He did. He
served as the dean of liberal arts briefly. He
spent one year on the court. And then he became a
distinguished professor. What was his
specialty?
Well, no, it's strange. I don't think he ever
published. Oh, okay. Let's see, did Dr. Mayo have a
nickname? Did students give him a nickname? If he
did, I didn't. I never knew him. Dr. Morgan, let's
go to him. Yeah, Bloody. Bloody Morgan. Bloody
Morgan. And he would later be department head,
wouldn't he? Yes, he was. Describe him. Well, he
was short, stocky, bald-headed, a bit dogmatic,
pretty much knew it all, excellent golfer, and
played baseball at Ohio State, I believe, had a big
league tryout, which didn't materialize. At
least he had the tryout.
He described himself as a scholar with, he said, a
foul man's body. Now, not many of those senior
colleagues were Texans, were they? It all came
from a wide variety of... John Paul was from
Tennessee.
What's the university in Nashville? Vanderbilt.
Vanderbilt. Hedgecock was in Tennessee.
Mayo? Yeah, through Mayo. I really don't know. I'm
not sure I know. Because... In some of the other
areas, I know there were lots of Aggies. And you
started working on your doctoral degree when?
1950s. 50. I was in Wisconsin in 53 and 54. So you
took leave? Took leave, yeah. And did you take wife
and daughters with you? Oh, yes, I did. And the
housing was tight at the University of Wisconsin.
And we lived in a trailer just across from the field
house, actually, and the stadium, is it called?
I'll think, maybe I'll think of it. I can't think
what the, what that trailer area was called.
Something Park, I believe. And anyhow, we had a
trailer with an oil heater for heat, no running
water. all the water and bathhouses. Actually, we
were comfortable. They had the thing organized.
They had a We were all graduate students. They had a
body that took charge of the thing, and we had to get
permission to get a larger trailer and bring our
father and daughter. We went up with our younger
daughter only, leaving our older daughter, Mary
Margaret, in the school in Lexington, Illinois
with her grandmother until we could. They gave us
permission to get a bigger trailer. We were on the
right side of town. They went to the best schools in
the city. Mary Margaret took West Isaac. We'd
forgotten the elementary school.
They were on the right side of town. We were
actually very comfortable. The kids would go down
the night that Margaret worked to help put me
through. Actually, she worked for the Wisconsin
General Hospital. And she worked nights as a
nurse's aide. And I was along with the kids. Well,
the girls would go down to the bathhouse, take
their shower. They'd hide in stalls and listen to
the young ladies talk about their babies and
whatnot. I frequently had to go rust out some woman
to go down and get them out. Now, did A&M give you a
leave of absence? Yes. So you knew you had a slot
coming back. Yes. And the... You funded all of this
entirely yourself? Yes, we had saved, and we
rented the house, and we had the same record, but we
spent too long to make it. I got a letter from Travis
Bryan when I was there. You couldn't believe I'd
been there that long, didn't need some money. He
wrote me this dear friend Harrison letter. I can't
quote it anymore, but it was in his famous style.
Right, and
then you came back then and finished your
dissertation a little later, and your special
area was what? And I, yes, I finished all the
coursework and passed my qualifying
and all that stuff. And came back and wrote the
dissertation. Went back to my office every night
and wrote it. Came home one night, wondered, how
many pages did you write? I said, I didn't write
any, and I sadly bought it. She didn't approve of
that. All right, during the 50s,
what were the changes here at A&M? During what?
During the 50s. Oh. What were the changes here at
A&M? The moment goes down a little as the veterans
go on. Not one thing. Well, one thing I remember
from that time, the computers came along. We had
our first computer center somewhere in the early
50s. And the first study done on the thing was one by
Charlie Hagelman, who was head of Lamar. I
remember the subject, but that's his first name.
And then Milton Huggins did a concordance to the
Book of Common Prayer, and a student, When
y'all come back, the students, generalize about
the students and what their interests were in the
50s.
Were there many English majors, many social
sciences, humanities students at A&M then? Not
many. I don't know how many majors. Yeah, we did
that. The typical student taking one of your
advanced courses, taking it as an elective?
We had some who did that. Those who did were good
students. Do you recall any pranks or jokes or
incidents in classes where the students figured
out some kind of something or other? Anybody ever
pull one off in class on you?
Very likely. I don't really know. All right. Now,
your nickname, I understand, was Happy. Yeah, I
think I discovered they called me Happy Harry. Do
you know when you discovered that? I
don't know. I don't remember how I found it out.
Now, let's stay with these nicknames a little. Mr.
Coffers, D.B. Coffers. Dusty Butt. Dusty Butt.
Bloody Morgan. Bloody Morgan. Did Huggett have a
nickname? I don't believe so. If so, I didn't know
it. Any others you remember in English or anywhere
else?
Well, elsewhere, of course, Square Root Jackson.
Mm-hmm. And Alphabet Thompson. Dr. Dan the Grade
Point Man.
All right. Oh, Jock Woods. Oh, yes. Oh, yes.
OK, now I anoint you as a philosopher. What did
those nicknames really mean? Why did students
come up with those? Oh, I think it was affection,
maybe. I agree with you. They weren't mean. Not at
all. Maybe perfection may be too strong. I don't
know. But they weren't mean. I think it was kind of
affection and respect. Now, correct me if I'm
wrong. They did not ever intentionally use those.